Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and share
the video to help spread this free series of
videos. Thanks for your help. Also, remember
to sign up via the link in the description to
get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA,
click the link in the video description to
check it out. It’s a network simulator like
packet tracer, but it’s even better,
and it includes all of these guided
labs to not only help you get hands-on
practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the exam
topics. I used it myself when studying for my
certifications, so I feel confident
about recommending it to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
In this lab we’ll configure SNMP, Simple Network
Management Protocol. As I write at the top of the
lab instructions, SNMP functionality is very
limited in packet tracer, so unfortunately
all we can do is enter a couple commands and
then check out a few things on PC1, the NMS.
I was hoping to clarify some more things about
SNMP configuration since I only briefly skimmed
over it in the lecture video, but we won’t be
able to do that. But that’s okay, you don’t
actually need to know about SNMP configuration
for the CCNA exam so don’t worry about it.
Okay let’s do step 1 and configure
read-only and read/write communities on R1.
ENABLE. CONF T. SNMP-SERVER, and
I’ll use the question mark here.
COMMUNITY, that’s the only
available command. No HOST command,
so we can’t even specify a server to send traps
to. All we can do is configure communities here,
and then try a few things out on the NMS. So,
let’s configure those communities. COMMUNITY
Cisco1 RO, that’s the read-only string. And
then COMMUNITY Cisco2 RW, the read/write string.
Okay, that’s all we can do. Now I’ll go on PC1.
Click on Desktop, then MIB Browser. This
let’s us view the different variables,
the OIDs, in the MIB of R1. So, up here enter
R1’s IP address, 192.168.1.254. However that’s
not all. Click on advanced, and then enter
those two communities we just configured.
Cisco1 for the Read community, and Cisco2 for
the Write community. I’ll leave it at SNMPv1, I’m
not sure if other versions would work in Packet
Tracer. Okay, now let’s explore some OIDs. First,
how long has R1 been running, what’s the system
uptime? Open the MIB Tree here, router_std MIBs,
iso, org, dod, internet, mgmt, mib-2, system,
and then here we can select ‘sysUpTime’. Then,
look at the top right. Notice the Get operation
is already selected, so I’ll just click on GO.
And here, you can see the OID,
and the value for that OID,
this is the current uptime of R1, how long it
has been turned on. Let’s check another one,
the sysName variable will tell us R1’s
hostname, which as you already know is R1.
Okay let’s check out some information about R1’s
interfaces. From ‘interfaces’, select ‘ifNumber’,
and then send the Get. The value is 4, so R1 has
4 interfaces. Now I’ll expand ‘ifTable’ here,
and ‘ifEntry’. Let’s click on ‘ifDescr’, and
send a Get. Now you can see a description of
each interface. It has a Vlan1 interface,
and three gigabit ethernet interfaces, 0/0,
0/1, and 0/2. How about the ‘ifType’ OID? Send
a Get, and you can see the interface type. So,
these gigabitethernet interfaces are copper,
not fiber-optic, interfaces. How about,
‘ifAdminStatus’? Send a Get, and you can see
that only this interface, which is G0/0, is up,
because it is enabled and connected to SW1. So,
there are some other things we could check but
I’ll leave it there. Now in step 3 let’s
use a Set message to change a value on R1.
I’ll do a Get once more for the system name.
Next, change the operation type to Set.
First, we have to select the data type,
what kind of data is the host name?
It is displayed here, ‘OctetString’.
So, select OctetString here. Then
enter a new value. You can change it to whatever
you like, I’ll just change it to R11. Hit OK,
then click GO to send the Set. As you can see, the
value has been changed to R11. Now if I return to
the CLI of the router, and hit enter, you can see
the hostname has changed to R11. Let’s check the
running config. DO SHOW RUN | INCLUDE HOST.
So, it has been changed in the config, also.
Okay, so that was a brief look at SNMP in Packet
Tracer. There’s not much you can do with SNMP in
packet tracer, but that’s okay since you don’t
actually need to know the configurations for the
CCNA exam. Next let’s take a look at a practice
lab in Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson NetSim practice lab.
As I've said before, SNMP configuration is not
on the CCNA exam topics list. So there isn't an
SNMP configuration lab in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
There are plenty of labs for the IP services
section of the exam, but not for SNMP because
it's not on the exam topics list. So, for
today's demonstration I will take a lab from
NetSim for ENCOR 350-401. This is the core exam of
the CCNP Enterprise certification. And they have a
practice lab down here in the security
section, configuring network device management.
And that is this lab here. So
this lab involves configuring
VLANs, which you know, SNMP which you
know a little bite, and then TACACS,
which is AAA. That is something I will talk
about in the security section of my course.
Okay, so these are the SNMP commands you need to
know. SNMP-SERVER CONTACT, COMMUNITY, HOST, and
LOCATION. So these are commands I already covered.
So you should be able to do this lab, even though
you're not at the CCNP level yet. Or at least
do the SNMP portion, not the TACACS portion.
Okay, so let's get on it. I already did task 1
beforehand, which is configuring the management
VLAN, because I want to get straight to task 2,
which is configure and verify SNMP on Router1.
And you can see what I did in task 1. So, I
added another subinterface here on Router1
with an IP address. Created VLAN99 on these
two switches and gave them IP addresses.
Okay, so let's configure and verify SNMP on
Router1. Okay, configure SNMP version 2 for
read-only access using the community string
Boson. Okay, so the command for all of these
is SNMP-SERVER, or it begins like that. And the
community is Boson. And it should be read-only.
Now, we don't specify version 2 yet, we specify
that in the SNMP-SERVER HOST command I believe.
So that should be correct. Okay then the contact
address, SNMP-SERVER CONACT snmp@boson.com.
Okay then the location,
SNMP-SERVER LOCATION R1_SNMP.
And then I have to configure
PC1 to be the trap receiver,
so that means the NMS, network management station.
And to use a community string of snmp_logs.
Okay, we haven't configured that community
string yet, but alright let's see.
SNMP-SERVER HOST 10.10.0.2. We're
supposed to use version 2, so...okay
looks like they do not suport that
command. snmp_logs is the community.
And that's it. Yeah, okay. So on Router1 verify
that SNMP is enabled for the correct community
string. So let's use some other show commands
here. SHOW SNMP, and look we can view all of those
things we just configured. SNMP COMMUNITY. There
it is, community name boson and it is read-only.
And this looks like it is a default
string, I did not configure that.
Let me see if that's in the configuration. INCLUDE
COMMUNITY. No it is not in the configuration,
so this looks like a default community string.
Okay, the location. SHOW SNMP LOCATION.
Okay, that is correct. SHOW SNMP
CONTACT. snmp@boson.com, okay.
Verify that SNMP is enabled for the trap receiver
with the correct community string. SHOW SNMP HOST.
Okay, there it is, 10.10.0.2, PC1.
Notice UDP port 162, that is the
port that the NMS uses to receive SNMP messages.
Traps are enabled by default. User, this is the
community. And it says security model version 1,
so this might not be working exactly as intended.
Let me check. So I have not finished this lab
of course, there's still a lot to configure.
But I will use the grade lab function to see if I
configured this SNMP portion correctly. Grade lab.
Okay and let's check out Router1's configuration.
Okay, so this is the, this is part of the AAA
configuration. TACACS, that's also
AAA. And here this login authentication
aaa_authentication. But looks like
the SNMP configuration is correct.
Here it is. Okay, so that is this short
SNMP practice lab. And we can also check
out Boson's lab solutions down here.
They have good explanations. Let me
see...here. Configure and verify SNMP on
Router1. So basically it just shows the
commands you have to use with some
sample output of the show commands.
Okay, so that's a quick look at SNMP, simple
network management protocol, configuration
in Boson NetSim. Once again, this is
not part of the CCNA exam topics list.
So you don't really have to worry about
remembering these SNMP commands yet. But
once you do go on to your CCNP studies, if you do,
you'll definitely need to know them. Okay, so if
you want to get a copy of Boson NetSim for CCNA,
please follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under the
video. Thank you to H W, Brandon, Samil, Aaron,
Tech Alameda, Marcel, Magrathea, Kone, Donald, C
Mohd, Gustavo, Anthony, Biraj, Junhong, Benjamin,
Tshepiso, Justin, Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison,
Apogee, Marko, Daming, Jhilmar, Ed, Value,
John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif, Boson
Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance. Sorry
if I pronounced your name incorrectly, but
thank you so much for your support. This is
the list of JCNP-level members at the time of
recording by the way, February 8th 2021. If
you signed up recently and your name isn’t on
here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.